# CS50-Final-Project
CS50 Final Project

First of all, please make sure that Xcode has been downloaded and installed from the Appstore. Secondly, download the CS50-Final-Project folder from the CS50 IDE. Then, open the CS50-Final-Project folder and immediately select and open a file called “CS50 Final Project.xcworkspace”. This command ought to directly open up Xcode and the workspace. Press on the small folder button at the top left side of the page in order to gain an overview of all the files used in this app. The main storyboard, which can be viewed under the layouts folder, shows all of the different view controllers used. Each view controller layout shown in the main storyboard is connected to a controller swift file - each of which can be found under the Controllers folder. In these swift documents you are able to see the code associated with each view controller and its functionality. In order to compile and test the app, please press the play button at the top left corner. This process of building the app might take a while, particularly if it is the first time doing so, but eventually a pop window ought to say “Build succeeded”. 

After that successful build, which starts the simulation, a view of an iPhone pops up. This will potentially also take quite a while to load, but eventually the screen will show a login page. Please either login, if you have already registered before or register if you are a first time user by clicking on the register button. If this button is clicked, a new register page will appear, in which you can create a profile using an e-mail address and a password, which must be six or more characters long. In doing this, make sure that your e-mail address is indeed in a valid e-mail format, which means it must include an @ and also ensure that both password and password confirmation match. Our application will also create an user alert if you fail to provide valid input but we thought we should tell you before you accidentally do so. If you have clicked on the register button, but you already have an account, which you want to use, just press on “I have an account let me log in.” link. This will allow you to return to the login page. In order to type into the e-mail and password fields, use your mouse to click on the field and then type using your laptop keyboard. Alternatively, click the hardware tab at the top of the Xcode program and click on keyboard and then toggle software keyboard. This will then allow you to type using an iPhone specific keyboard. Please also make use of this option, if your keyboard does not allow you to type an @ symbol. After successfully either logging into your profile or registering, you will be forwarded to the content that is only visible to users with an account.

The first page that appears after successful registration or log in is a charity category list. All the charities are sorted into categories, which explain the key focus of each organisation. By holding your mouse pressed and moving it upwards, you are able to swipe further down, thus being able to see all of the categories available. At the top right of the page, there is a button showing “Profile”, which upon pressing it, will take you to your profile page. Here you can see a history of your donations, if you have completed any so far and you will also be able to see the last time and date of your most recent donation. You can scroll through your history by conducting the same movement as needed for scrolling through the categories i.e. hold your mouse pressed and move it upward. On the profile page, you will also have the opportunity to log out of your account by pressing the “Logout” button. This will log you out and will forward you to the login page, where the process of logging in or registering can be repeated. From the profile page, you are, however, also able to press the “I care about” button to return to the overview of categories. Here, please decide which key issue lies closest to your heart or that you would most like to donate to and using your mouse, please press on one of the categories to select it. 

Having selected a category, you will now enter the swipe modus for the charities. You will be able to see the first charity in the category and basic information about it including its name, its logo, a basic description, the category it belongs to, its rating out of five stars and a link called “Visit Website”, which upon pressing it will allow you to view the charities webpage. Assuming you have pressed that link, safari will open up on your iPhone. To return to the app, press the iPhone home button and click on the DonateNow app icon, which will allow you to return to the charity that you have just viewed. To view the next charity within the category, hold your mouse pressed on the logo of the current charity and move it either to the left or the right, similar to a “swipe” movement. This swipe navigation will allow you to move from one charity to another within the same category. If you have reached the last charity and swipe one more time, you will see the first charity again. If you would like to explore charities of a different category, please press on “I care about” at the top of the page, which will take you back to the category overview. 

Having decided upon one charity within one category that you would like to donate to, press the blue heart logo with the dollar sign on it. This will then forward you to a next page, where you will be reminded which charity you have selected to donate to. If you have changed your mind or you would like to contribute to a different charity rather than the one selected, press the “Back” button at the top of the page to return to the charity swipe modus. If, however, you would like to go ahead with your donation, please select either 1$, 5$ or 10$ as a donation and press using your mouse on one of the amounts. This will then trigger and carry out a fictional payment, resulting in you seeing a page thanking you for your contribution. Press on the “Tab here to return to categories” to do exactly what it says and to continue using the app. Alternatively if you would like to donate to the same charity again, press the “Back” button to return to the page, which allows you to select one of three amounts.

Besides our implementation in Xcode, we would also like to give you access to our database, which is Firebase. We added your account “emilyhong@college.harvard.edu" to our project so that you can view and edit our database. You can access Firebase under https://firebase.google.com/. 

This has been an explanation of how to navigate and use the DonateNow App and how to access our database.
